The DIABETES data sets in this directory are provided for use in 1994 
AI in Medicine symposium submissions.  Permission is granted to use the
data sets for other research purposes as long as appropriate credit is
given as to the source (AIM-94 data set provided by Michael Kahn, MD, PhD, 
Washington University, St. Louis, MO).


Index:
------

* Data-Codes: a listing of the codes used in the data sets.

* Domain-Description: This file describes the basic physiology and patho-
physiology of diabetes mellitus and its treatment.

* data-[01-70]: data sets covering several weeks' to months' worth of
outpatient care on 70 patients.  An additional 10 sets will be made
available two weeks prior to the symposium for interested parties.  Please
contact the organizers if you would like to obtain these data sets.


Methods:
--------

You do not need to use all the data in order to participate.  Use any 
subset of the available data from either the ICU data set or the diabetes 
data set.  Furthermore, do not feel constrained if your methods cannot 
be applied directly to these data sets.  We will consider submissions
on related (i.e., clinical data interpretation) topics.  If in doubt,
consult with us via e-mail at <aim-94@camis.stanford.edu>.


The 'Matchmaker' Service:
-------------------------

We realize that an accurate interpretation of clinical data requires 
a thorough understanding of the physiological principles and clinical 
issues involved.  We also realize that many AIM researchers do not 
have convenient access to medical expertise, and that a symposium 
focusing on a clinical theme may catch several parties at a disadvantage.  
Conversely, some clinical researchers may be interested in participating 
but may not have collaborators on the computer science end of the field.  
To offset such disadvantages, we will provide a simple 'Matchmaker' 
service for AIM-94.  The purpose of this service is to establish a medium 
by which researchers can seek collaborators of complementary background 
and interests for AIM-94 participation and beyond.

If you are interested in participating in this program, send a
one-paragraph description of your background, research interests, and the
type of collaboration you are pursuing to <aim-94@camis.stanford.edu> by
September 20th.  We will collate these entries and distribute the whole
list to all participants of the program.  It will be the participants' 
responsibility to contact others to discuss and establish collaborative 
efforts; AIM-94 organizers will solely act as mediators.

